Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm here with a return guest, Dr. Patrick
Hassan. He's senior lecturer at the School of English
Communication and Philosophy at Cardiff University, and today we're
going to talk about, I mean, basically the philosophy
of suicide. We've already had that sort of discussion
on the show, but today we're going to have
a more open discussion about the topic of suicide.
So Doctor Hassan, welcome back to the show. It's
a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you for having me once again, yeah, it's
a pleasure.
OK, so, I mean, I decided on a few
topics here, but of course we don't have to
just uh stay, uh, I, I mean to just
uh restrict ourselves to the topics I chose. So,
uh, but I would like to start by asking
you this, do you think that the suicide should
Always be medicalized because I mean particularly in our
more modern Western societies, countries who I mean we
tend very much to do that for example whenever
someone just expresses a wish to die or to
commit suicide. Um, I mean, there's even suicide prevention
lines that even other people can contact or they
can contact the police or some, uh, or the
medical system in some form of way, in some
way to basically to prevent that person to go
ahead with it, and they usually receive a medical
diagnosis, a psychiatric. Diagnosis or something like that. Sometimes
they are even, uh, uh, even met, uh I
mean they, they are even hospitalized in a compulsory
way. I mean, they don't have any choice whether
to, to be hospitalized or not. So, uh, uh,
but, uh, I mean, since you come, um, to,
uh, uh, since you look at it from a
philosophical perspective, I mean, how do you approach this
question?
Yeah, it's, it's a good question and an important
one for the reasons that you just gave, um,
and you know, as we talked about last time,
I mean, since the, the explosion of the empirical
sciences in the sort of late 19th century, increasingly
become a trend, right, to sort of medicalize and
understand this phenomenon through a, um, medical, medical lens.
And, um, I think at first, at first, uh,
glance, it, it's got to be said that of
course. Um, YOU know, suicide is very often caused
by or significantly, um, influenced by. Things which the
medical sciences are interested in, so things like depression,
for example, is the, is the, probably the, the
biggest one, right, that it would be crazy to
deny that um, you know. Pretensions to suicide or
disposition to suicide are are never affected by things
like depression, uh and so that's, that's probably good
to get on the table just at the outset.
Having said that, I think the answer to your
question should, you know, should we exclusively think of
suicide in this medicalised lens that is increasingly becoming
common. I think the answer to that has to
be no, um, when we consider the philosophical dimensions
of the concept, um, so I think it. If
we, if we think about suicide ideation just by
definition, um, as something that is. It's something that
ought to be treated rather than understood. Um, I
think that sets us off on the wrong foot
and primarily I think for, for three reasons. So
first of all. One problem with that I think
and that's that can have quite dangerous consequences is
that it, it merely just begs the question, right,
it takes suicide to be exclusively shaped by irrational
forces, um, you know, purely biologically determined or, or
in fact socially determined. So, you know, again, as
we talked about before, there is a vast body
of literature which, which has this view that suicide
is a kind of symptom of various kinds of
um social. Social ills or like ways in which
our society has gone wrong, if you couple that
with a sort of exclusively biological determinism, you, you
get this understanding of suicide is really just exclusively,
yeah, a problem to be fixed, like an ill,
that's it's symptomatic of some kind of irrational psychological
or sociological force, and I think that begs the
question precisely because it. If we take suicide to
be of that nature by definition, um, it automatically
ejects any kind of agency that the, the suicidal
person would possess, like it automatically says, OK, well
the reasons which they might articulate to themselves, which.
Might seem quite plausible and of course might be,
you know, available to revision. Those things just get
off the table immediately and so the, the people
in question are just considered at the whim of
these various irrational forces and pressures. And I think
that that's a dangerous assumption to make at the
outset precisely because, yeah, it, it dissolves any possibility
of agents in the first place. So that's my
first sort of concern. Yeah,
let me just comment on that. I mean, I
also think that it is a mistake for people,
uh, psychiatrists specifically, but, uh, the medical system more
broadly to assume that because someone suffers, for example,
from depression, that they, uh, that because of that
they no longer. Have sort of access to the
necessary cognitive mechanisms or cognitive abilities to make a
rational decision. I mean, I, I, I think that
is that specifically is something that a psychiatrist or
any other, uh, I mean. Any other doctor who
has proper training should assume, I mean they should
have to prove that in fact, in the, in
the case of that specific individual, they are no
longer or they are suffering from such. Um, I,
I mean they are suffering from depression to such
a degree that they are no longer in possession
of their cognitive faculties to be able to make
an autonomous decision, you know.
Yeah, no, I think that's right, I think that,
um, a couple of things that, you know, depression
is not this one sort of catch-all concept that
always surfaces the same way in the same degree,
that, that's got to be said for sure. Um,
AND also then there's a further question that's tethered
to that about whether or the extent to which
autonomous decisions can be made within that, that kind
of experience or that kind of condition. Um, AND
I think that, um, you know, both of those
are such important questions that even if we grant
that medicine has some role to play, and I
think that's a reasonable view that medicine can contribute
to this, this debate and understanding of what this
phenomenon is. Um, THAT just reveals already at the
outset that there's a lot more complexity here than,
than is perhaps made out with the sort of
actual, well, suicide merely is by definition something that
you should go to a psychiatrist for, like to,
to fix you in some way I think is
a fairly dangerous assumption, especially given. You know, thousands
of years in, in almost every cultural tradition where
people have thought about this philosophically, which I'm sure
we'll come on to, but um, yeah, it, I,
I, my first concern is along those lines that
it sort of just begs the question that, um,
you know, agency is not really relevant or autonomous
choice is not really relevant to this uh domain
when I think it, it really is.
And, and also I think that in that particular
case if people just assume that whenever someone is
suicidal or has some form of suicidal ideation, they
must be, I don't know, in a way out
of their minds that in a way they are
not fully. They do not have full control over
their decision making. I mean, I guess that what
that reveals is not necessarily people having a proper
medical or scientific approach to the question, but Having
a moral bias because they are basically injecting the
question with even though they might not admit it
that I mean killing oneself or committing suicide is
just morally wrong always and we have to prevent
that at all costs, you know,
absolutely, yes, you know, there is this danger of
With this kind of disposition to the medicalization of
suicide, I think without, without a doubt, at least
some strands of that already smuggle in moral baggage
and moral prejudice, um, that it's impossible, like it,
of course, the sciences tend to frame themselves as
neutral on normative questions, right? But I mean that
just isn't really the case, right, there's normativity built
for all these concepts like health, for example, is,
is viewed with these kinds of connotations, um. And
I think that you're right, um, the history of
using the term suicide, right, that carries with it
not just emotional connotations, but negative moral connotations as
well. That, that's very evident when you look at
the way people describe, uh, the deaths of sort
of villains like Hitler versus people we tend to
admire like Socrates or others. The word suicide itself
carries with it these negative moral connotations, and I
do think that these are often smuggled in. To
this medicalised approach and it's definitely something to be
wary of as well, that it's not as neutral
as it, it sort of presents itself as being
for sure. Um And and just to follow up
on that as well, I mean, a connected problem
is that There is perhaps a pretension also to
think that suicide is a bit more, the motivations
for it are a bit more simplistic than the
reality actually is. So in the reality, there's a
very wide range of reasons and motivations which, which
make suicide, um. Uh, PERCEIVED to be an attractive
option, um, across history and across culture, and it's
not, I think again one of the mistakes is
just tethering it to a concept like depression or
to, um, exhaustion or weakness of some capacity. Uh,
WHEN in fact there's, there's a whole range of,
of reasons why people have articulated, um, suicide to
be something maybe not just permissible, but maybe admirable,
maybe even morally required in some, in some circumstances.
And I think that sort of diverse range of
motivations and reasons can also be overlooked in a
strict sort of medicalizing view which just sees suicide
as a kind of pathological, um. Phenomenon, that's another
danger, um. And perhaps one last thing which might
be relevant on that as well is that just
on that pushing the normative point rather than just
kind of a more conceptual understanding of the concept.
You know, there is a tradition of thinking a
bit more critically about why the medicalization of suicide
has become so prevalent. So one thesis is just
that, you know, we became very, very confident in
the ability, the explanatory power of the empirical sciences,
and since that we've just tried to apply this
in many other domains just for the purpose of
better understanding. But I suppose one other kind of
way of understanding why we've headed in this direction
is slightly more sinister and suspicious, and you can
find it in in sort of postmodern thinkers, especially
Michel Foucault, but not exclusively. Thinking that The medicalization
and criminalization that often goes with these kinds of
practices of suicide. That looks very close to a
potential sort of coercive mechanism of the state to
find, you know. What would otherwise be morally permissible
expressions of freedom or of protest or something like
this to be reined in and controlled. Um, SO
that's another way of, of postulating or thinking about
why we've headed in that direction in the first
place is that perhaps this is at least suspiciously
close to an attempt at like state regulation of
freedoms or expressions and and a lot of people
of various traditions have have been taken in by
that and thought this. Something to be said along
those normative lines as well as this kind of
descriptive conceptual problem of of whether suicide just is
a solely medical phenomenon.
Yeah, and I mean, I think that, and I
want to ask you about this specifically because here
in Portugal, for example, in late 2023, a new
law came to be where I mean people who
suffer from certain psychiatric conditions and for example people
who even express suicidal ideation, it can be forced.
Fully hospitalized. I mean, they are not given a
choice. They are just taken to the hospital, hospitalized,
and they are forced to stay there for where,
uh, how long, uh, I mean, the psychiatrist who's
in charge of them decides. I mean, they, they,
they can't just say, OK, so I, I want
to leave now. Can I leave? And I mean
they are not allowed to, to, to leave the,
the psychiatric ward or some or some. Other place
in the hospital. Uh, AND I mean, I, it's
interesting because sometimes that kind of behavior or that
kind of approach to, uh, suicide and even psychiatric
conditions more broadly, uh, uh, uh, of course, uh,
uh, we, uh, I'm, I'm referring here to psychiatric
conditions more broadly. I, I'm not implying that suicide
necessarily is the result of psychiatric condition, but just
to make the point. I mean, it's interesting because
actually it can lead to contradictory results because supposedly
people pass those laws because they want to save
people or help them with their mental suffering or
something like that, but actually I've heard a few
people saying that since that law got passed, They
go to the doctor and they lie about their
mental condition because they are terribly afraid of being
hospitalized and once they are hospitalized, they have no
say in where. They will get dismissed from the
hospital and when they will be able to get
back to their regular lives, you know, so I
mean, I guess that when it comes to even
the idea of helping or saving people in some
way, I mean, forcing people through that process can,
can have the opposite kind of result that we
want, I think.
Yeah, so I mean that's that's a really nice
example because it, it raises a number of questions
there. So, so first, um, you might, the moral
of that story might be something like, we ought
to be more suspicious of, um, state legislation which
is couched in terms of compassion. Like we want
to save, we want to help, um, but in
fact there there might be something else going on
there that we need to be attentive to and
this is like a broader example of how. Yes,
perhaps we ought to be more suspicious than we
are of how moral rhetoric can actually conceal some
kind of other, um, intention, and I, I guess
that's precisely what Foucault's point was in these points,
and, and he gets that of course from Nietzsche.
Um, SO that's one thing. And then another interesting
thing about that is that, of course, one of
the key concepts in this discussion of the philosophy
of suicide, um, a lot of that discussion centers
on the concept of autonomy or freedom. Um, AND
sometimes that has been justified as a sort of,
um. Uh, uh, OR harnessed rather in service of
justifications for the permissibility of suicide or, or, or
sort of, um, yeah, physician assisted. Uh, DEATH, um.
On the grounds that look, you know, it's an
autonomous if it's an autonomous choice, if we have
good reason to believe that it's a free autonomous
choice, um, then it might be the case that
people have a right to this kind of, um,
this kind of thing. Uh, BUT then it gets
quite complicated, right, because the, the, the worry that
seems to be on the table is one of
paternalism, like we don't really want the state being
in the driving seat and deciding when or where.
Um, PEOPLE have to be hospitalized or when on
the other side of the, of the debate, when
people, um, might have to be, you know, whether
euthanasia is uh plausible, like who decides whether that's
actually the case. So the paternalism worry is, is
centering around this and it it really comes down
to this idea about whether. Um, YOU know, autonomy
is a chief value. When is autonomy, um, sort
of. Um, MANIFESTED or realized in the context of
suicide, uh, and again, going back to what we
were saying earlier, the one of the problems with
the, the medicalization view is that it seems at
the outset to undermine the possibility of autonomous decision
here.
Uh, NO, that, that actually is a very great
point, and we have the same sort of issue
here in Portugal because back in 2023 we also
passed the law to grant people access to um.
To euthanasia or to medically assisted suicide, but the
thing is, first of all, that law hasn't been
regulated yet, so it's the same as as not
having access to euthanasia at all. But I mean,
because we also passed that law that I just
described earlier, I mean they, they are. Assuming that
whenever anyone expresses a wish to die, they must,
they must suffer from a psychiatric condition and they
must be prevented from doing that. So I mean
one law, if, if the medical, the assisted suicide
law got regulated and people would have access to
it, I mean, Then in what cases would they
be able to get access to it, because I
mean if they express a wish to die, then
they must suffer from a psychiatric condition, and if
they suffer from a psychiatric condition, they are not
in possession of their full capacity to make decisions,
so. You know, it's, it's, it's like it's a
conundrum. I mean then we should assume that no
one would ever have access to medically assisted suicide
because if they express a wish to die, then
they are immediately labeled as, I don't know, depressed,
depressed or something like that. Yeah,
exactly, and I think that's partly explaining ironically. Stigmas
associated with suicide, so part one of the pretensions
of the sort of scientific community and the and
the sort of medical profession has to be, In
many cases to destigmatize certain concepts, like to understand
them better, they're not spooky, they're not, you know,
these uh necessarily immoral or, or sort of metaphysical,
metaphysically charged things, but rather we can understand them
by the processes that we understand everything else and
so to demystify is to somehow, Sort of destigmatize
in in many cases, that doesn't always work out,
but I think this is a case uh and
the example you gave is very, very vividly demonstrating
that is that. You might say that that kind
of approach has had the opposite effect in sort
of re-stigmatizing, uh, suicide in a different way. So,
you know, prior to the 18th century, uh, or
19th century rather, uh, suicide might have been stigmatized
as this kind of moral evil, a sin, a
sort of, sort of unrepentable sin. You might say,
OK, well we grew out of that and we
started using these medical concepts, but we've almost re-stigmatized
it by saying that the mere fact that you
might have a suicidal ideation implies that you, you
just couldn't possibly be thinking rationally, that you couldn't
possibly be a healthy functioning normal individual. Um, AND
so it reintroduces the stigma in a, in a
sort of different language or or sort of different
framework. So I do think that's a danger we
need to be. Um, ATTENTIVE to
and also I, I mean, I think that if
we just look back into the history of psychiatry,
it's pretty evident that it has been very much
influenced by the social cultural context where it operates
because I mean just a few decades ago, homosexuality.
It was considered a mental disease. TRANS people just
until very recently were considered also, or I mean
a transgenderism or whatever you want to call it,
was considered also a form of mental disease, and
I mean we, we tend to go through these
sort of A cultural evolution in the way that
psychiatry seems, it doesn't seem it is actually not
impermeable to a culture to the social cultural context
and to cultural influences at all, but it seems
that psychiatrists. Also, because, you know, they are inculturated
and so many times they don't even notice that
they're doing that, but they're not willing to admit
that some of what they do is actually furthering
stigmatization and prejudice and so on.
Yes, no, I, I, I wouldn't disagree with that.
I think that um This probably happens to sort
of greater or lesser degrees and, and perhaps it's
exacerbated in certain elements of medical professions more than
others, but I think it's a reasonable and and
fairly modest view to have that our, you know,
medical practices and perhaps other scientific practices. You know,
it, it's, it's quite hard to completely divorce them
from the socio-cultural circumstances from which they develop and
emerge. I mean that's not too controversial view, I
think, to hold that that these kinds of professions
are, you know, in some ways shaped or, um,
influenced by the, the very context from which they're,
they're, they're practicing within. I think that's a reasonable
view, yeah.
Mhm. So do you think that suicide can be
justifiable, and I mean what just what would justifiable
mean for a philosopher in this particular context? I
mean, would it mean something like being a rational
decision or would it be something else?
Yeah, yeah, good question, um, and I think that
uh yeah, justifiable. You know, we're talking in uh
primarily sort of normative terms, so there's this sort
of deontic distinction we should probably make because I
think philosophers are gonna want to say a few
different things or or ask a few different things.
So you might say, OK, what do we mean
by justifiable? Do we just mean that there are
reasons to find this practice permissible, right? So it's
something that doesn't invoke blame, um. Do you mean
that it's, it's it's suicide could be justifiable insofar
as it not only is permissible but maybe is
admirable, that's something we should sort of look at
with praise, at least in some, some context. And
then perhaps even, even more strongly, could suicide be
justifiable in the sense that not only is it
permissible and perhaps sometimes admirable, but maybe even sometimes
obligatory that you're morally required. To commit suicide under
certain certain um conditions and while that is perhaps
a less popular view, it has been defended and
it has been part of various cultural institutions for
for a number of years. So justifiable here leaves,
I think, um, these claims open. It's connection to
rationality is an interesting question too, because that will
depend on whether so if you think it's justifiable,
the reason it will be justifiable will be augmented
by this question about rationality. So it could just
be, look, um. Suicide can be justifiable, let's just
say permissible for the purposes of this example. Whether
it's, it's come to you on the basis of
rationality or not, right, if you have a right,
let's say, to end your life, and uh many
people in like the libertarian tradition uh have argued
for something like this, one version of that view.
Uh, WILL hold that. Uh, THAT right, uh, holds
whether you come to, to have this kind of,
um, desire or this kind of disposition for rational
reasons or not, right? That's just aside from whether
you possess the right in the first place. So.
I guess my first response to the question is
just that it things are a little bit more
complicated there, there's a, there's a vast web of
how to figure out what justifiable means and uh
you know, what the arguments might be in terms
of it's in in favor of it. So, I
guess a nice place to start there would be
to say something like, look, even philosophers thousands of
years ago who were very on the whole, anti-suicide,
they thought this was a sort of morally revolting
or repugnant kind of activity. So Even philosophers like
that with Plato might be one of those, right,
in the laws he talked about how this is
impermissible, um, and, and sort of inexcusable, but even
he makes exceptions, right? He does think there are
conditions in which suicide might be. Permissible or or
at the very least just excusable, right? So he
talks about cases where, you know, and perhaps anticipating
some of the stuff uh in the psychological literature
where one's mind is so corrupted, um. That your
moral character can't be saved as a result. This
might be a condition where suicide is permissible, um,
when one has participated in some kind of horribly
unjust system or or or law uh that could
cause great harm, this might be another case. Um,
HE even considers cases of extreme personal misfortune where
where just kind of circumstances are so horrible, the
suffering is so overwhelming, uh, that that might be
a permissible case. So even though he was generally
very anti-suicide, there might be cases in which he
would find that permissible. But I think generally, there's
gonna be 3 things to consider, like is, is
suicide or can suicide ever be justifiable? Most philosophers
have centered on three kinds of considerations. So, so
one consideration would be, does suicide violate any duty
that I might have to other people, and that
can be specific to others like family members, um,
dependents of various kinds, like if you're a parent,
um, do you have to consider your obligations to
your children before you would take this on board.
Um, SO obligations to others, do you have an
obligation to yourself, right? So in the Kantian tradition.
Kant generally thought that suicide was not only just,
uh, you know, a, a moral wrong, but one
of the worst things we can do, um. And
part of the reason, the justification for that was
thinking that we have duties to ourselves as rational
autonomous beings. We possess a certain kind of dignity
and instrumentalizing that in via suicide, he thought um
was was um impermissible. So we might have duties
to ourselves. And then you have a, there's a
history of sort of religious arguments as well which
say, OK, suicide might be wrong because it violates
a duty to God, like maybe God has or
the gods have sort of dominion over our lives,
uh, and God or the or the gods really
only they have the power to decide whether we
can check in or out of of life, um.
Those arguments aren't particularly popular anymore and due to
greater secularization, philosophers, uh, within religious traditions might still
defend versions of them, but they tend not to
be the ones, uh, typically discussed anymore. Um, BUT
those are generally some considerations for why suicide might
be off the table. And so if you don't
find any of those convincing. This opens up possibilities
for thinking that this could be, this could be
justifiable, like if at the very least, if there's
no norms or duties that we'd have to refrain
from this, it looks more and more like this,
you know, we, we, we don't really have good
reasons to prohibit this across the board. Yeah, um,
so yeah, I can say a little bit more
about, um, approaches to that if you, if you'd
like.
Yeah, yeah, let me focus specifically on the duty
to others because I find that one very interesting
to talk about. I mean, because Uh, what, uh,
I mean, to what extent should that duty go?
Because let's imagine that for example, someone is suffering
a lot mentally or physically or both. I mean,
uh. Of course I think people should at least
always consider others when they make that kind of
decision. I mean, particularly if they have close others.
I mean, if they don't have any family or
friends, I guess that the decision is easier in
a way, but If you have a duty to
other people like family members, friends, and so on
to not make them suffer with your death or
to not, to not leave them alone in the
world or something like that, I mean, whatever kind
of duty you are considering, I mean, but, but
to what extent should we, should you consider that
because at a certain point it becomes a bit.
I, I, I, I, I mean a bit even
macabre in the, in the way that, OK, so.
If other people, if let's say other people, if
you express a will to die or a wish
to die and other people try to, for example,
coerce you into not going through with it because
they will suffer and so on, I mean, but
are you really or should you really be morally
obliged? If you're just suffering all the time and
you are mostly sure that you will continue suffering
for the rest of your life, I mean, should
you be morally obliged to stay alive for the
sake of other people just to prevent their suffering,
because in that sense, in that case, I mean,
it would be other people forcing you to suffer
for their sake, you know, so I mean it,
it can get really complicated, right, and it's not
as straightforward as just saying, oh, you should, you
obviously shouldn't. Uh, COMMIT suicide because other people will
suffer. I mean, it's more complicated than that, right?
Yeah, absolutely, yes, and I think that, um, this
has been noted in the literature that arguments of
this kind will only go so far because they
are justified extrinsically, they're justified on the relation that
you have to particular persons or a community at
large, and of course there's lots of ways you
can relate to a community and to persons. Um,
SO this is always going to be somewhat, these
arguments are gonna be somewhat shaped, uh, by whatever
particular relations obtained that we're talking about, and that
of course affects the comprehensiveness and effectiveness of these
arguments just for the reasons that you said. So
look, there's lots of ways in which. You know,
one's decision to commit suicide can have negative effects
on others, right? No one's going to deny that.
Like it can produce economic hardship, it can produce
specific and perhaps unique forms of grief that are
very hard to bear for the people that are
left behind. Um, VARIOUS ways in which that can
cause suffering. But notice that that can also go
the other way, right? So you can say that,
you know, if you're in such a, a period
of, of, of suffering and sort of horrific pain.
Um, SEEING that, right, can cause suffering for the
people close to you. Um, AND there's also a,
a very large literature dedicated to this problem. And
of course this is again a sort of cultural
institution in in many parts of the world where
Suicide has not been condemned on this basis, but
actually has been seen to be something admirable or
required on the ground that the person in question
feels like a burden, right, to the rest of
the community or to their loved ones because. In
other words, A reciprocity relation is not obtaining anymore,
so that you can't put into the society or
the social group, um, proportionally to what you're taking
out of it anymore. And so outside of academic
philosophy, you find, you know, some communities who have
practices such as, uh, you know, very elderly and
sick members of society will commit suicide or be
assisted in suicide, um, for the benefit of their
community. Um, AND there's a lot of philosophical literature
exploring precisely that kind of relation, uh, along those
lines that, you know, thinking about suicide, the morality
of suicide in terms of the relation of the
person in question to either particular others or to
the community or society at large. Um, CAN actually
produce, um, various kinds of moral judgments and and
outcomes on this, that it's not just that. It's
not as straightforward as you say that committing suicide
is, is wrong because it always causes harm or
suffering to a community. That's just not the case.
And in fact, act utilitarians, for example, so people
who think that the morally right action in at
any time is one which maximizes aggregate utility impartially.
They can harness arguments of this kind, right? They
can say that actually you're morally required to commit
suicide. Why? Because, uh, doing so would actually macro
uh maximize aggregate utility for the community or the
or the, the social group. And there's been variations
of that too, so you don't have to be
a utilitarian to make that argument, but that's just
an example of how contingent these, um. Arguments from
a duty to others can really be talking about
the morality of suicide.
And I mean, I guess that we all know
examples or, I mean, if people don't know or
don't have examples of that directly in their lives,
uh, we can very easily imagine or at least
if your thinking is not in a way blocked
by social taboos or something like that, you, we
can very easily imagine situations where it's pretty obvious
that even It's even better for the person herself
to just die because they're suffering is suffering horribly,
and even many times when, for example, loved ones
are in the hospital and they finally die, even
the family members admit that it was better for
that to happen. I mean, because their life was
no longer. WORTH living. So, and, but I mean,
of course, sometimes people don't say that openly because
it's still a social taboo to say something like
that, but sometimes even family members and other loved
ones admit it openly that that person dying was
better for them as well.
Yes, absolutely, and that brings up a really crucial
point as well is that I think. A view
of that kind, which is, I think becoming more
and more, um, yeah, socially acceptable perhaps, implicitly commits
itself to, I think a quite a plausible thesis,
which is that, um, It's not that life as
such is valuable, that just merely being alive is
good, but rather equality of life, like the type
of life. So life becomes valuable in virtue of
certain kinds of, you know, possessing certain kinds of
goods or or being able to pursue them at
least or something like that. So once you accept
something like that, you can begin to formulate an
argument that, you know, OK, well, once life becomes
once it's sort of. Sinks below a certain threshold
of quality. Um, IT becomes, you know, sort of
the compassionate thing to do, to, to, to allow
this to happen or to, to, you know, understand
it or comprehend it. So I think that pushing
against this sort of, um, I guess you'd call
it a sort of sanctity of life view where
just merely being alive is, is good and ought
to be protected no matter what. Um, I think
that's a reasonable move to make and I think
that. My own view of that is it's, it's
sort of paradoxically quite morbid to kind of cling
to life until the very last moment despite the
quality of it, um, no matter how much suffering,
you know. And, and not even necessarily cashing us
out in hedonic terms, in terms in terms of
pain and suffering, but maybe in a sort of
more normatively robust, uh, way by appealing to something
like dignity. um, YOU know, you, it might not
be the pain and suffering which is the relevant
factor, but it could be that if, if one
feels or knows objectively that they just are not
living with a certain kind of dignity anymore. Um,
SUICIDE can, can then I think, become more of
a, uh, understandable as a justifiable practice, um. And
in fact many, you know, quite a few empirical
studies have shown that a lot of people who
are uh in assisted dying facilities where this is
legal, um, report overwhelmingly so that it's not necessarily
just the, the pain and suffering, which is what
they want to avoid, but it is the feeling
that they've, have lost a kind of dignity or
lost a kind of autonomy in the way that
they live. So I, I'm kind of, I'm quite
sympathetic to this idea that it, it's not really
life as such which has value, but it's, it's
the, the life, the quality of life that matters,
not just its longevity. um, AND, you know, you
can put pressure on the sanctity view by saying
something like, look, we already plausibly think that there
are permissible cases of taking life, right, in self-defense,
for example. Um, VARIOUS kinds of, uh, contexts in
which self-defense would, would lead to the death of
another, but we find it permissible. And once you
open that door, it becomes reasonable to ask, OK,
well. What even if you think life is sacred,
if you also think there are permissible cases of
ending it, there's at least a conversation to be
had about whether suicide might meet something in some
circumstances, some of those conditions.
Yeah, you know what, I find it quite ironic
because sometimes the same people who, for example, unconditionally
Express themselves against euthanasia or medically assisted suicide are
the ones that, for example, when someone who was
suffering a lot finally dies, they say rest in
peace. So I mean it's kind of they admitting
that actually probably they are in a better place
now than they were before. So uh huh,
yeah, exactly, yeah. Uh, YOU know, there's all kinds
of things that can be, can be said about
that, and, you know. Um, OF course, a lot
of the discourse against things like, uh, a physician
assisted, uh, suicide and euthanasia, a voluntary euthanasia is
that it's sort of expressive, the expressive character of
that prohibition is, is something cruel about that, that
it sort of condemned you to live. Even if
the quality of that life is just nowhere to
be found. And um I think that's that that
kind of angle has been pushed in in places
where this is very hotly debated, such as the
UK and in many US states uh at the
moment. Yeah.
Uh, uh, YEAH, so from a philosophical perspective, uh,
how do you approach assisted suicide? I mean, do
you think that people should have access to it
because, uh, if I understand it correctly, I mean,
thinking from a philosophical perspective, uh, I mean, people,
uh, the way we approach people committing suicide is
not exactly the way as we should approach assisted
suicide, but because Uh, the first, in the first
case, it's the person herself doing it, and in
the other case it involves the participation of other
people and usually medical professionals,
right? Yes, that's right, and um You know, I
think there are important normative distinctions to make between
these, these two concepts and, and, uh, just legally
speaking as well, I mean. A lot of the
Uh, when it comes to physician assisted suicide, usually
there's a lot of conditions which have to be
met before this becomes an option, so it's not
just. Um, WELL, usually there's a sort of rationality
requirement there as well that this is an existing
request. There's a sort of cool off period of,
of, however, you know, a month or so where
people have to think about if this is really
what they want because,
yeah, there, there was that case, that recent case
in Spain with. Uh, THAT girl Noelia Castillo, where
she had to wait for even after the medically
assisted suicide procedure was approved, she had to wait
90 days before, uh,
yeah, and I think, I think part of the
justification for that is this worry that, um, look,
suicide, as we were talking about, suicide can be
impulsive, right, it can be something that. You know,
on reflection, they would not want to, to, to
actually do, but there's moments which are particularly intense,
um, and it can be an impulsive decision. Dispositions
towards it can be sporadic, uh, other times it's
ambivalent, it's something you have to wrestle with, uh,
and of course as we've talked about, it can
be, those things can be modified or caused by
things like depression some of the time, right, um,
or other kind of um illnesses. So I think
the worry there is that things like a cool-off
period are irrelevant because they somehow help build in
a condition of rationality. And if you think that
rational decisions are pertinent to a genuinely autonomous decision,
I think that's partly why, um, in the physician
assisted suicide case, there's very often this this built-in
condition, um, that it has to, these things have
to obtain before we talk about that. Now notice
you can contrast that with a lot of other
things, like very often we find it. Uh, PERMISSIBLE
to allow people to behave in certain ways which
might be self-destructive or hurtful, um, which are irrational,
right? But because the stakes are perhaps lower where
we find it permissible to accept. But in the
case of suicide or, or, you know, intentionally self-caused
death, um, the stakes are very, very high, right?
It's, it's the cost of a life, so the,
the, the loss to that person, the loss to
the family members that may exist, etc. um. So
I think in those cases because the stakes are
perceived to be so high, um, we're less happy
to allow, um, decisions to be impulsive or irrational,
even if we are in other cases where the
stakes aren't so high. So that I think that's
a a just a pertinent difference to the case
uh of physician assisted suicide versus um. Yet, suicide
more broadly. Um, Whether it's whether philosophers are going
to think it's permissible, again, obviously this is controversial,
but um I I think it's hard to divorce
that question from the sort of broader issue of
whether we do have a right to die. Um,
SO again, the libertarian tradition is gonna say yes.
There's different versions of that, so some are very
permissive in thinking that we have a right to,
to die. That doesn't imply anything about whether suicide
is in fact prudent or rational, so it's quite
permissive. You'll get more sort of um conservative versions
of that which say, um, exercising of that right
has to, to have something like rationality or or
or kind of prudence uh built in. But um,
yeah, I mean there's different versions of, of. How
we might think of uh a right of this
kind, right? So you might just think that we
have a right, uh, for others not to interfere
in our decision to end our lives, but that's
a very sort of minimal version of that, so
non-interference. Uh, PEOPLE can't interfere, we have a right
not to be a sort of, um, coerced one
way or another. Um, A stronger version would say
something like, um, well, we have a right to
die because there's no, there's, there's no violation of
any duty. So if you're not convinced that we
have a duty to preserve ourselves, we have a
a duty to others, uh, in terms of staying
alive, or that we have a sort of like
a duty to God, if you don't think any
of those obtain. Then we have this kind of,
you know, right to die merely through process of
elimination. There's just no, nothing's stopping us from doing
this. We have a liberty that is not, you
know, uh, for it's not foreshadowed by anything else.
It's not prevented by anything else. And I suppose
the strongest one, and this is where I think
that the debate gets really controversial with physician assisted
suicide, is that you might think that we not
only do we have a right to be not
interfered with in our decisions to end our lives,
but actually we have a right to be assisted
by others to carry out this kind of action.
So it's not, if you think it's an autonomous
decision, we have a free decision to end our
life or or or, you know, when at the
time of our choosing. Uh, WE have a right
for others to help us, um, do that in
a sort of responsible and safe way, um. And
I'd say that that's sort of more at the
extreme end of the end of the spectrum. Um,
AND of course, there's, there's a lot of controversial
aspects of this, like, OK, do we have this
right because our body is somehow our property in
the same way that like my watch is my
property and I can do what I want with
it. Um, THAT'S interesting because it has sort of
quite a few metaphysical, um, controversies built in, like,
am I separate from my body? Are we just
speaking in metaphorical language there? Um, SO that, that's
all very controversial. I would say probably the greatest,
what I would consider to be the most. Convincing
counter to reckon to to reckon with, uh, to
the finding physician assisted suicide morally permissible and perhaps
um something that the state should support. Mhm. Probably
the best counter to that is probably something along
the lines of a concern about whether such a
practice would disadvantage the most vulnerable in society. Like
would it in some way put pressure on vulnerable
persons, say perhaps the, the elderly or like socially
stigmatized groups, uh, disabled persons. Does it put pressure
on them to think, oh, I am in fact
a burden to society, I should be making use
of this for the benefit of others.
Oh, OK, OK, but in that specific case, because
I think we have to be careful here because
sometimes people use arguments like that to then come
up with conspiracy theories about how this State would
be killing people against their will because that's not
uh what you're saying there, I mean it would
still have to be the person herself making the
decision,
voluntary, that's right, yeah, but, but but that's the,
that's the concern is that it, and I'm not
saying this is correct, I'm not sure I buy
this, but I do see it as a genuine
concern is that, would a policy that allowed for,
Voluntary Physician assisted suicide, right, physician assisted suicide, would
that facilitate a sort of cultural feeling, which would
nonetheless pressure vulnerable persons to think of themselves as,
uh, burdens to society or would it, would it
signal or express that they. Uh, YOU know, they
don't have lives which are considered worth living or
something like that, it's,
yeah, but, but I think, I, I mean, if
I may, I, I think that that is not
supported actually by the data. If you look at
data from from countries like Belgium, the Netherlands, Switzerland,
and so on where people have access to medically
assisted suicide, I mean, first of all, It's a
tiny, tiny, tiny minority of people requesting it, even,
even among people who have horrible medical conditions, physical
or psychological. I mean, even among them it's a
tiny minority of people requesting medically assisted suicide. So
and then, I mean, even when people are, are
able to. For example, mention one or one or
two examples of people who perhaps shouldn't have been
granted access to medically assisted suicide because they found
afterwards that the person only made that choice because,
for example, they were homeless or something like that.
I mean, it's, it's always people always refer to
the same cases, so it seems like it's, it's.
Like a needle in in the in in a
in a haystack because that's I I mean it's
it's, it's virtually no one doing that, so.
Yeah, no, so two things about that I would
say, because I'm sort of generally on board with
that kind of response. Um, SO one is that
look, some people frame this as a kind of,
this isn't isn't quite the, the objection that I'm
raising, but there's one version of it which says
something like. If you open the door to this
kind of practice for certain kinds of individuals, you
get this slippery slope where it'll become more and
more prevalent, we'll sort of allow it for more
and more things, it'll cultivate a sort of a
culture or phenomenology of of certain demographics feeling like
they ought to partake in this even if they
don't want to. Um, AND, and as you said,
I mean the, the little em empirical evidence we
have for this doesn't really. Overwhelmingly support that thesis,
right, and of course. That's something you would need
to have years and years and years to assert,
you know, to study those trends to see if
it actually does substantiate it. The the empirical evidence
that we have at the moment doesn't necessarily, uh,
substantiate that view, so that's one thing. Um, THE
science, we need to, the jury's out on that.
Um, BUT yeah, there's this, there's this other concern,
right, that, um. These kinds of arguments, and you,
you see it the same in in other sort
of controversial areas of bioethics, so things like cloning
and genetic engineering, this comes up too. Um, THERE'S
this worry that a slippery slope of that kind
or like this, this kind of expressive character can't
be augmented in any other way. So if we
allow this practice, there's no other way of stopping
this feeling out there being cultivated among certain demographics.
And I'm not sure I buy that that's true.
Like, why, why couldn't we, um, sort of. Have
instill a practice like this, but. COMMUNICATE it in
such a way precisely to avoid those kinds of
problems like that that seems to be off the
table from the outset when people make these, uh,
kinds of counterarguments, but I'm just, I'm not sure
that that's really ultimately, um. Uh, YOU know, a
plausible way of thinking about this, um, and again,
and I think, I think also that people tend
to, when they're making a case against assisted suicide,
they are really underestimating people's resilience because I mean
if you look at the numbers even worldwide, of
course the total number of people you can say
it's a Big number. It's in the hundreds of
thousands of people that commit suicide every year. But
I mean compared to the total population, that's actually
a very tiny number of people who actually go
through with suicide. Of course you can add to
it perhaps people who try to do it but
they fail and perhaps, but that's harder to study
people who would actually like to have access to
assisted. Suicide, but they just don't. And so I
mean they would actually like to die, but they,
they don't have the proper means to do that.
But, but still, I mean, even people who live
in extremely dire conditions, the vast, vast majority of
people do not commit suicide. And even if you
ask them, I, I think they would say they
don't want to die, so.
Yeah, that's right. I mean we're talking about very
small numbers and and minority cases and um again
just to pick up on something you you you
suggested there is that um you know, we have
to be especially attentive to. The reasons at play
here. So, you know, if someone is pushed towards
suicide, um, because of like material conditions, like socioeconomic
conditions, um, the, the appropriate response to that to
me doesn't seem to be something like, oh well,
see, you know, allowing physician assisted suicide is wrong
because it pushes these people towards it. The the
appropriate response seems to be. OK, great, so we
need to be doing more to improve our socioeconomic
conditions so people don't be put in that scenario
when they feel pushed towards it. And that's what
I mean when I say that I'm not sure
that these slippery slope arguments really comprehensively deal with
the various kinds of fail-safe mechanisms we have, or
could have rather, to prevent exactly those kinds of
problematic cases. Um, SO I, I do think that
um. While I take that counterargument seriously, very often
how it's couched, especially in the public domain when
it's debated, is, is rather hasty, exactly for the
reasons that you gave,
yeah. And I, I mean, I had this, this,
this very interesting conversation last year with an Australian
physician, Dr. Philip Nitschke, and uh because he's, uh,
he supports medically assisted suicide, but, and the only
two conditions he says should be in place for
people to have access to it is that they
should be adults, so they should be over 18,
and they should. HAVE mental capacity he calls it
mental capacity. I mean, of course that's the trickiest
bit of his argument because even he himself couldn't
tell me exactly what that means. But I mean,
I guess that it's basically what we were discussing
earlier. I mean, really checking whether the person is
able to make an Autonomous choice. Of course it's
hard. I understand that, but it's basically that, and
I mean, he told me that when it comes
to people who have access to it, he thinks
that the only thing they should have access to
is basically drugs that they could take home and
then use them to commit suicide because for example
when it comes To injecting drugs or something like
that since it has to be done by a
physician, he says that he wouldn't be willing to
do that because it puts some of the responsibility
on the physician, and the physician then is most
of an actor in terms of it's, it's me,
the physician who has to do it, you know,
to inject. Inject the drug or something like that,
and he also says that sometimes people actually wouldn't
go ahead with it if it was themselves doing
it, but they want other people to do it
for them. And so if it's just, oh, take
this drug home, if you want to take it,
take it. If you don't want to take it,
that's fine, it's your decision. Removes that layer of
uh. The risk associated with people just not really
wanting to commit suicide but actually wanting to put
the burden on another person to do it for
them, you know.
Yeah, no, that's definitely a relevant ethical concern because
it It's very, again, it's very hard to divorce
conceptions of responsibility, particularly from the physician assisted suicide
case, right, so um. If if it, if something
like that's true, um, I do think there's an
interesting question about whether how intimately involved the the
physician has to be here, um, and not just
the sort of the phenomenology of, you know, taking
home the drug and taking it, maybe feeling isolated,
maybe feeling that this is, um, you know, something
which is. Not they're not 100% certain about about
taking this on, whereas the physician who recommends it,
I I'm probably more sympathetic to that view that
they have to be a bit more directly involved
in this, um, because of that responsibility question. Um,
SO, so, yeah, that would be, that, that's certainly
something that philosophers would be and I think have
been interested in exploring. Um, Michael Cholby, who's a
sort of leading figure in the philosophy of suicide.
Yeah, I've interviewed him last year or two years,
yeah, so, I mean he has, he has stuff
on this that's, that's really interesting. So I definitely
think that's relevant, yeah, um, and I think that.
That's possibly connected to another kind of stigma with
suicide that we haven't talked about, but. Very often
I've I've seen in that particular debate. This Sort
of, um, speculating about the, the character of the
person who wants to undergo this kind of process,
whether it, whether it's suicide generally or whether it's
physician assisted suicide, that it's very often a practice
that is, I, I guess in some ways smeared
by, um, these speculations about what is motivating this.
So is it, it is it sort of tethered
to. A sort of disposition to fear or cowardice
or something like this, or is it, um, yeah,
deflecting of responsibility and I, I find that another
quite pernicious angle in trying to critique, uh, what
is otherwise, you know, a reasonable debate to have
because. As we've talked about earlier, right, there's lots
of different motivating factors which someone could have, um,
which, which might make them consider suicide. To the
extent that some of those might be noble, right,
it's not always, you know, as, as the Stoics
thought thousands of years ago and people have since
then as well, that, you know, suicide can be
undertaken for noble and admirable, um, reasons. It can
be an expression of freedom, um. And you can
always turn the tables and think actually like clinging
to life too closely. Not only is it maybe
sort of morbid in the way that I suggested
earlier, but that itself might be tethered to various
kinds of, um, vices, right? That itself, you could
make a case that it's a sort of cowardice
or something like that. And in fact, the ancient
Greeks. You know, thought of things this way. I
mean, even had a word for that kind of
disposition of loving life too much that you'll put
up with under any conditions, right? It's kind of
philosuchia. Um, THERE'S a famous line of Sophocles, the
great tragedian says when he says, um, I'm paraphrasing,
but he says like only a coward or a
fool will will cling to life in any kind
of misfortune or any kind of condition or suffering,
so. Um, THERE'S a question again, it comes back
to this sanctity of life issue that is pertinent
to precisely that physician assisted suicide, um, point. Is
that whether it is mere existence that we're valuing
or whether it is something like the way in
which we live our lives, like does it have
quality of life above a certain threshold? Is it
tethered to something like living honorably or having excellence
or something like that? Uh AND so I do
think that those attempts to. Debunk or kind of
derail the. Pretension to or the or the sort
of arguments that are sort of more amenable to
suicide or physician assisted suicide. Attempts to derail those
by sort of attacking the characters of the people
in play there, um, uh, are are pretty implausible
when you start thinking about the sort of comprehensiveness
of the, the reasons possibly for this practice that
philosophers and non- philosophers have been thinking about in
every culture for thousands of years.
Uh, SO, look, I, I'm just noticing that we're
reaching our time limit. I, I mean, is, do
you have enough time for one more topic, or,
OK, OK, OK. So I, I wanted to ask
you, I mean, this is something that we actually
been touching on throughout our conversation, but I mean,
from a philosophical perspective, do you think that It
is a personal flaw we should consider a personal
flaw or that we should even morally condemn people
or someone who decides they no longer want to
live or who actually went through with suicide.
Yeah, it's it's a good question and it picks
up on that last point is that I think
the. The answer has to be, and I think
that's maybe the general moral of our discussion today
to draw is would just be that. Suicide physicians,
this is suicide. It's, it's so. Complex and diverse
insofar as the reasons people might want to decide
to do these things, that there's no real comprehensive,
catch it, catch it all answer to this, right,
morally speaking, um, and I think the same is
true here, I mean, you might say look, there
are cases of suicide which do express or, Uh,
are the result of, um, various vices, um, or
personal flaws like maybe it could be cowardice, like
the person who, I don't know, perhaps gets themselves
into financial trouble or doesn't want to take the
responsibility. Um, YOU know, you, you might look at
that and think, well, that was the easy way
out, I mean you, you, you know, we've all
heard this kind of discourse and, and some philosophers
have, have
made, yeah, and, and even, and even then when
it comes, for example, to financial stress, I guess
it depends on the situation because, because I mean,
I, I was, it just came to mind that
there's these uh uh uh Japanese series and. It's
also a manga liar game where the mother of
one of the protagonists commits suicide in Japan because
she was burdened with debt, and, and, and I
mean, I think that in that particular case the
son wouldn't inherit her death and so she, she's
just decided to go ahead with it to basically.
Unburden the sort of situation that she was putting
her son through by having to deal with huge
amounts of debt, you know. Yeah,
so I agree that even in some cases of
that, it's not so clear cut, but I'm just,
I'm just imagining a case where it might be
plausible where someone maybe perhaps trivially decides to commit
suicide too hastily and maybe that. It could be
expressive of of some kind of vice. I mean,
yeah, there's a host of examples, but. That's what
I was getting at, I mean there's there's the,
the motivating reasons for suicide are just so vast
and diverse that that's just not always gonna be
the case, um, and maybe not even typically the
case. So whereas lots of philosophers have taken this,
this kind of tact and like Plato, Kant even
more so, perhaps more emphatically associates, um, suicide with
personal flaws, with deficiencies, with weaknesses of various kinds.
That's just that's. It's too It's too wholesale to
be plausible, right, there's there's lots of cases where,
I mean a famous one that Hume describes, David
Hume describes is, you know, like the, the um
the Roman senator. Cato, who, who commits suicide because
he doesn't want to live under the dictatorship of
Julius Caesar, um, the suicide to protect other people,
uh, various kinds of martyrdom. I mean these, these
aren't typically associated with, with, um, these flaws, and
perhaps that's why they're not typically described as suicides
because the term as we've discussed, has these negative
connotations. But it seems to me that, you know,
there could be lots of cases in which suicide,
um. Expresses noble traits, express expresses virtues that we
admire, um.
Yeah, I mean there's even those cases like for
example, that a monk, that Buddhist monk who self-immolated
to, I mean, basically protest against Chinese repression and
stuff like that. I mean, I, I don't think
that anyone out there would say that he did
something wrong.
That that's right, and I think that um. You
know there's various, um perhaps there are people out
there who would say that that even that was
wrong for for some, you know, take if they
take the sanctity of life or sort of religious
arguments maybe, but um, yeah, those are deeply you
know controversial and and I think quite implausible, but
the. That's right. There's it's not necessarily the case
that suicide is going to be tied to these
flaws. And like I said earlier, and there's cases
in the history of philosophy and the history of
cultural thought in general where in fact, uh, you
might think that not ending your life, uh, is
could be compatible with something like, like cowardice, right?
Like it takes, there's lots of cases where it
takes courage, right, to, to end your life. It's
not an easy thing to do. And so I,
I do think that, um. Yeah, this this idea
that there's always some kind of personal flaw or
vice at play, uh, isn't a particularly plausible, um,
critique if it's taken to be a comprehensive attempt
to sort of, uh, debunk or critique um moral
justifications for suicide. I mean that just
I mean actually when it comes to that argument
about supposedly people who commit suicide being cowards, I,
I, I mean I could be wrong, but it
seems that. Uh, I mean, fairly plausible to say
that in the vast, vast, vast majority of cases,
it's actually the opposite. They are brave because they
even have to go against their own survival instincts
and it's extremely scary to go ahead with it.
Exactly, there's been a number of philosophers who say,
I mean this is part of Hume's argument where
he says that look, if we suddenly developed a
more compassionate or at least um. Sort of um
liberal or permissive approach to suicide as he sort
of seems to be getting at in his essay
of suicide, um. He, he considers this response, he's
again this kind of slippery slope like oh if
this becomes permissive, like won't more people be doing
this and just throwing their lives away trivially, and
one of the things he says is that look,
he identifies this psychological principles that we have deeply
rooted impulses and instincts to cling to life, um,
making it very difficult to commit suicide. Schopenhauer says
the same thing, it's like the, You know, it's,
it's what guards the exit gates, this like pretension
to live, this kind of instinct to keep going
and our fear of death is so significant that
it's hard to overcome that. And so you might
harness that and say actually there is at least
a kind of courage that has to be um
manifested or possessed in order to carry out an
action like this. And once you start sort of
teasing out how that works, again, I think that
it, it collapses any sort of comprehensive rejection of
suicide because it's somehow. Stigmatizes like oh it's the
easy way out or it's like the coward's way
out, and it's like, you can point to cases
where that might be true, but that doesn't really
do much to comprehensively reject the practice or tether
it to these various kinds of vices because there's
lots of counterexamples as we've been saying.
Mhm. Yeah, I, I mean I would even go
a step further and say, because I mean, you
know, people who condemn suicide or condemn it morally.
Uh, THE, and say that, oh, you know, that,
that this is one of the reasons why, uh,
um, I mean, going ahead with suicide is stupid
or you should never do it. I mean, they
point to cases of people who survived the suicide
attempts and who later said, oh, the, the, the,
the 2. And I, I, I mean, the second
I, after I jumped off the bridge or something
like that, I immediately regretted it. I mean, I'm
not saying that the person is lying, of course.
I mean, that's, that's perfectly plausible, but they might
be mistaken. Uh, TO, to an extent, because I
mean, is it really that they regretted it, or
is it rather that, uh, the second they jumped
off the bridge, the, the, the fear kicked in,
and that's, yeah, you know, uh, that that's they
might be mistaken when it. TO that.
Yeah, it could be. I mean there's a question
about what what philosophers sometimes call like an epistemic
injustice, like in terms of sort of speaking over
how people report about their experiences in the medical
condition in particular this comes up, but it kind
of works both ways. Like you might, you might
think that um. It would be a sort of
an epistemic injustice if we were to say to
the To the suicidal person um that regretted it
that oh you're just mistaken, like actually you were
on, you, you know, you had justifiable reasons and
and that's just your impulse kicking in, but that
cuts the other way, right, so you might think
that an epistemic injustice is going on, you know,
going back to our first topic, when medical professionals
say that you don't have any good reasons to
consider this, like you're just. Expressing a kind of
pathology, right, you, you, you're, you have suicide suicidal
ideations because there's something wrong with you and that
you're not being rational just by definition. That's also
a kind of epistemic injustice, so that concept can
be quite useful for for philosophers in this domain
in particular, uh, and it, it, it sort of
applies or is relevant to this question about. Um,
PARTICULARLY in the physician assisted suicide case about the
extent to which people feel coerced into avoiding the
practice or by participating in, uh, in it. So,
um, yeah, those are definitely relevant concepts to, to
bring in as well for a moral evaluation of
the concept.
Yeah, OK, so I mean there would be other
things that I would like to discuss with you.
Maybe we have to schedule a 4th interview for
the channel, but look, where can people find you
and your work on the internet?
A couple of places. So there's my department page
on the Cardiff University website. If you type in
Cardiff University philosophy, and you'll find the wonderful staff
that we have in the department and my profile
will be up there. I also have a website
just Patrick Hassan.com and I update that regularly with
my with my research. So um yeah, if you're
you're interested in hearing more about what I do,
those are two places you can check.
Great, so look, thank you so much for coming
on the show again. I know that this is
a very sensitive and heavy topic to discuss, but
I, I hopefully we uh did it justice, so
it was great to talk with you.
Yeah, thanks again for inviting me and I, I
really enjoyed the conversation. Like you said, it's a,
it's a heavy topic in many ways, it has
to be handled with care and um yeah, I
think we hopefully did a good job of that
and, you know, really insightful questions that I was
happy to engage with, so thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegeru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herz Agnon, Michel Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and
Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel,
Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego
Londono Correa. Yannik Puntervan Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro,
Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank,
Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.